Good morning, judge. Yes, I can hear
you.
>> I beg you to give me a chance to speak.
My father was transferred to there and I
was not given the opportunity to deal
with a lawyer.
>> Carol Bdios is a US citizen who lives
outside Miami, Florida. She was
expecting her father to land at the
Miami airport, but he never made it to
her. and instead she got a phone call a
few days later that he was in ICE
detention facility.
>> Please, I I I beg you to allow me the
right to due process and allow me the
right to speak
as an American citizen. I myself has the
right.
This was the start of what would be a
very lengthy stay in ICE detention. And
for Carol, it was the start of this
[music] journey of trying to figure out
where her father was, when he was being
moved to the next facility. [music]
What's happening now in the United
States is beyond our control. Federal
government has [music] say so over that.
But we do have a control here.
Towns like Estansia, New Mexico, small
towns that a lot of people haven't even
heard of, have become pretty focal to
the administration's goal of carrying
out this massive immigration crackdown.
>> The prison with a federal contract is
the lifeblood for the town of Stansion.
2/3 of our gross receipts tax comes from
the prison being open [music]
with a federal contract.
>> It's a necessary evil. It is what it is.
it it's the system we have.
>> Then the deeper you get into it and you
see [music] what kind of crazy money is
going into something like this and you
realize that oh this is also part of
corporate America, you know that they're
making money, too. They're just doing it
[music] with people.
>> It is really hard when you're trying to
make sure that a town or a county
doesn't become bankrupt. But ultimately,
it benefits everyone when a county is
not dependent on human suffering to
survive.
This person said they were there for 32
days. They went out and saw the sun
probably only 13 hours in total.
>> The food is poor. They're not treated
like a human. What everyone feels here
is fear and more fear.
>> So, one of the things we wanted to do
was get a sense of what the conditions
were like in some of these facilities.
We wrote some prompts. What do you want
the world to know about what it's like
in ICE detention? And can you describe
how you feel right now?
>> One of the letters we got back was
[music]
from Jose. He says he was arrested on
February 13th. This is the most
difficult experience of his life.
He's like a my dad.
Me and my dad connect a lot.
>> We have the same determination.
Even if the whole world is against you,
you believe on something firmly, you
work very hard to to get there.
>> Jose was formerly processed into the
Chrome North Service Processing Center.
And then from there he went to the
Brower Transitional Center in Pmpo Beach
>> and transferred to the Torrance County
Detention Facility
>> in Estonia.
My dearest Lord, I offer you my praise
and honor today.
Lord, I also pray for those who are
being held until the process of their
deportation is complete. Amen.
>> I sat in on over 600 meetings throughout
my career as clerk, kept their records,
studied them, and I thought I can do
that someday.
Estanzia is my hometown.
Lots and lots of friends, lots and lots
of relatives.
It's my my village.
>> Immigration, it's part of our country,
but right now it [music] seems like it's
a bit more aggressive than it's ever
been.
what's going on right now with all the
bad publicity [music] in Torrance, it
just kind of hurts me. And I know the
people that work there are good people.
I just don't like this stigma of
Torrance County being in the spotlight
as being a bad place because of the
detention center.
I just landed in Albuquerque.
My mind is so focused on my dad. get a
glimpse of the nature and the beauty
outside, but this is not what they see
there. This is not their reality.
>> In a quarter mile, turn right.
>> Turn right then turn right.
>> But I can lead.
>> You have arrived.
In 2017, Core Civic, which is this
behemoth in the private prison industry,
told its investors that it was idling
the Torrance County detention facility
in response to a drop in the federal
inmate population. But in 2019, Torrance
County signed a deal with ICE that
guaranteed Core Civic revenue for 714
beds.
And that allowed Core Civic to reopen
the detention facility.
Hey, we are I hate my glasses.
County Courthouse.
So we're this is town hall right here
during this whole fiasco with ICE and
the prison closing and reopening.
They're a great neighbor and they're a
good asset and they help the town. But
Stansa is not the prison. But the
problem is that Stansa doesn't exist
without the prison.
The whole history of Stansa, that was
the whole town. And all this was just
annexed in order to bring the prison
into the municipality and bring the
taxes into town.
The prison with a federal contract is
the lifeblood for the town of Stanton.
2/3 of our gross receipts tax comes from
the prison being open with the federal
contract.
>> There are kind of three main ways that
these ICE detention facilities operate.
ICE can own the facility and contract
out the management and the security
services to [music] a private company. A
private company can own the facility and
ICE directly contracts with them to have
bed space for people in ICE custody. And
then there's this other way which is
also very popular where a private
company owns the facility and ICE
doesn't have a direct contract with that
company but it has an agreement with the
county in which the facility is located.
And what that means is that these local
governments across the United States
have this growing important role in ICE
detention, something that they wouldn't
normally be involved with otherwise.
And I will admit,
even to this day, me, Nathan Dial, not
Mayor Dial, Nathan Dial, I don't believe
in private prisons.
All the things that government should be
running, prisons are one of them. You
know, I don't think the government needs
to be in my bedroom, but the government
needs to be in my prison.
Every several months, the Torrance
County Commission votes on an extension
of the ICE contract. In March 2025, all
three commissioners voted to extend it.
But one commissioner, Commissioner
Harmo, said that she wanted to visit the
facility because she had concerns about
reports of poor conditions and she
wanted to see for herself before she
voted again in October.
I did not see any of the things that
I've been hearing about or what the
advocates come to our meetings and say.
I didn't see any of that. But that's not
to say that these people who are saying
that there's something going on in there
that they're tell that they're lying.
I'm not saying that. It's just what I
saw.
>> Good morning, chairman, commissioners,
and committee members. I'm Tiffany Wong
with Innovation Law Lab. This is a
translation of recording from a family
member of someone recently detained at
PCF. Our lives were normal, but since he
got there, one doesn't sleep here. I
have depression that I can't stand. I
had to start taking medication. I don't
sleep. My son has depression that he
can't stand knowing that he's going
through all those abuses there. Where is
the enforcement of human rights? Where?
Who is the authority? Who is
responsible? No one. No one takes
responsibility.
I've been in the detention center
probably 20 times at this point. We hear
stories from people all the time who are
requesting the smallest things like
they're either not receiving all their
documents that they need to pursue their
cases or there's a huge problem with
interpretation. There are sometimes when
it's very clear that an individual is
not understanding their interpreter, but
they're continuing with the case
anyways. There are other times where
people do ask for time to find an
attorney, and they're not given that.
Individuals have deportation officers
that should be able to answer their
questions, at least specifically about
their case. Unfortunately, ICE officers
are not often in the Torrance County
detention facility. And the men tell us
all the time that while they have these
tablets to be able to send messages,
they almost never receive a response.
A lot of people in ICE detention at the
Torrance County Detention Facility have
never been to a facility like this
before. [music] They've never been to
jail. They don't have a criminal
history. So, this is a really big shock
to them.
>> The guards that the folks who are
detained see on a day-to-day basis are
staff [music] of core civic. Those
people are trained to run a prison. And
so, they don't know about the process of
[music] any immigration processes
really. So, folks are really getting
disappeared into that system and just
lose access, so much access to the
outside world and any information that
goes along with it.
You know, my dad tells me there's a lot
of suicidal thoughts that they have that
[clears throat] they have to find
themselves
busy, that they have to keep themselves
busy. This was done by an Ecuadorian
inmates who has since been deported.
This is a wallet that somebody does from
the from the Doritos and sell it for
like a a box of ramen or whatever.
There are several challenges with
operating a detention facility like this
in such a rural environment.
One of the biggest that Core Civic has
consistently struggled with is staffing.
Government inspectors have repeatedly
dinged the company for failing to
maintain adequate staffing levels. One
of the things we've heard is that the
company pretty consistently flies in out
of town workers to staff the facility
because it's so hard to find people in
the local economy who want to do the
work and who can pass the ICE background
check.
>> We started recruiting at the high
schools because they didn't have a
credit history to stop them. They were
clean, you know, generally in terms of a
background. The job isn't about, you
know, brute [music] strength. It's all
about communicating with people,
diffusing situations, but also being
open to what their needs are. People
that were just fresh out of high school,
it's their first full-time job. You
know, a lot of people don't make it.
It's not for them. So, they would end up
having to bring in people from outside,
you know, working at other facilities.
So, you would see a, you know, kind of
an advertisement on the internet page.
New Mexico needs help. Do you want to go
out there? There's a $1,500 bonus. But
those people would be sharing hotel
rooms. They would work 16our days, you
know, come back, [music] do it again.
Life working for them was constant
pressure and constant everything. you
don't you know I did my best to you know
kind of disconnect from work but the
higher up you go the more difficult that
is to do so some people drink um you
know people of whatever fine religion
whatever they do to cope
>> on May 29th the immigration judge
ordered Jose to be removed from the
country and not long after he was
transferred from the Torrance County
Detention Facility to a facility in El
Paso known as the El Paso Enhanced
Harden Facility. It was when Jose was at
this facility that he decided that he
didn't want to appeal the judge's order.
Carol is able to get him transferred to
Otto,
>> just across the Texas New Mexico border.
Mid June he's transferred back to the El
Paso tent facility and then he is flown
[snorts] from El Paso to Louisiana. He's
booked into the Pine Prairie Ice
Processing [music]
Center.
>> Right.
>> And he's there from mid June to late
June when he's deported [music] to
Honduras.
>> [music]
>> What's happening?
[laughter]
>> [laughter]
>> Okay.
Jose's case is not all that unusual.
We've spoken to several people who were
in ICE detention for months before they
were deported. And it's not only
financially and emotionally taxing on
them and their families, but this is
also really expensive to taxpayers.
When Jose was in ICE detention, the
agency was funded for a little over
41,000 beds. Under the current $45
billion allocated for ICE detention,
that could expand to 100,000 beds or
more.
>> Things are going to get overcrowded.
It's going to be understaffed. And if
you think their needs aren't being met
now, there's no way. I just feel like it
it's deteriorating.
The county commissioners are strongly
incentivized to keep the detention
center around because of this
manufactured dependence because it is
really hard when you're [music] trying
to keep a community afloat or trying to
make sure that a town or a county
doesn't become bankrupt. But ultimately,
it benefits everyone when a county is
not dependent on human suffering to
survive.
>> Do you know how you're going to vote?
I'm probably going to vote for because I
think it's a work in progress and I
think we can fix this. We can't fix the
fact that people are being
taken from their homes or families and
what's going on out there, but maybe we
can fix what's going on in the facility,
the isolated incidences that are going
on.
Garcelo.
for ice.
Ice.
No,ch.
>> [music]
[music]